examples/citi-bike/README.rst, before:

Citi Bike System Data
=====================

We'll be using Flow to capture and process Citi Bike `system data`_.
The dataset is available in the S3 "tripdata_" bucket as compressed CSV files
of each ride taken within the system, by month.

.. _system data: https://www.citibikenyc.com/system-data
.. _tripdata: https://s3.amazonaws.com/tripdata/index.html

Modeling Rides
--------------

Every Flow collection has an associated `JSON Schema`_ which describes its
documents. Let's begin with an example of a ride document that we want to schematize:

.. _`JSON Schema`: http://json-schema.org/understanding-json-schema/index.html

.. code-block:: json

   {
   "bike_id": 26396,
   "duration_seconds": 1193,
   "user_type": "Customer",
   "gender": 0,
   "birth_year": 1969,
   "begin": {
      "station": {
         "geo": {
         "latitude": 40.711863,
         "longitude": -73.944024
         },
         "id": 3081,
         "name": "Graham Ave & Grand St"
      },
      "timestamp": "2020-09-01 00:00:12.2020"
   },
   "end": {
      "station": {
         "geo": {
         "latitude": 40.68402,
         "longitude": -73.94977
         },
         "id": 3048,
         "name": "Putnam Ave & Nostrand Ave"
      },
      "timestamp": "2020-09-01 00:20:05.5470"
   }
   }

Here's a JSON Schema which models Citi Bike rides:

.. literalinclude:: ride.schema.yaml
   :language: yaml

There is a lot going on here. Let's unpack:

It defines the *shape* that documents can take.
   A *ride* document must have a ``{"bike_id": ..., "begin": ..., "end": ...}``.
   A *location* must have a ``{"latitude": ..., "longitude": ...}``, and so on.
   The ``$ref`` keyword makes it easy to define and re-use common structures;
   e.g., a "terminus" can represent either the beginning or end of the trip.

*Validations* constrain the types and values that documents can take.
   A "longitude" must be a number and fall within the expected range, and "gender"
   must be a value within the expected enumeration. Some properties are ``required``,
   while others are optional. Flow enforces that all documents of a collection
   must validate against its schema before they can be added.

   Flow is also able to *translate* many schema constraints (e.g. "/begin/station/id
   must exist and be an integer") into other kinds of schema -- like TypeScript types
   and SQL constraints -- which promotes end-to-end type safety and a better
   development experience.

*Annotations* attach information to locations within the document.
   Here, "title" and "description" give color to elements of the document.
   They're machine-accessible documentation -- which makes it possible to re-use
   these annotations in transformed versions of the schema.

   Annotations are a powerful feature of JSON Schema. Flow extends the JSON Schema
   specification with additional annotation keywords such as *reduction strategies*,
   which detail how multiple document instances can be combined together.

Capturing Rides
---------------

To work with ride events, first we need to define a collection into which we'll
ingest them. Simple enough, but a wrinkle is that the source dataset is
CSV files, using header names which don't match our schema:

.. code-block:: console

   $ wget https://s3.amazonaws.com/tripdata/202009-citibike-tripdata.csv.zip
   $ unzip -p 202009-citibike-tripdata.csv.zip  | head -5
   "tripduration","starttime","stoptime","start station id","start station name","start station latitude","start station longitude","end station id","end station name","end station latitude","end station longitude","bikeid","usertype","birth year","gender"
   4225,"2020-09-01 00:00:01.0430","2020-09-01 01:10:26.6350",3508,"St Nicholas Ave & Manhattan Ave",40.809725,-73.953149,116,"W 17 St & 8 Ave",40.74177603,-74.00149746,44317,"Customer",1979,1
   1868,"2020-09-01 00:00:04.8320","2020-09-01 00:31:13.7650",3621,"27 Ave & 9 St",40.7739825,-73.9309134,3094,"Graham Ave & Withers St",40.7169811,-73.94485918,37793,"Customer",1991,1
   1097,"2020-09-01 00:00:06.8990","2020-09-01 00:18:24.2260",3492,"E 118 St & Park Ave",40.8005385,-73.9419949,3959,"Edgecombe Ave & W 145 St",40.823498,-73.94386,41438,"Subscriber",1984,1
   1473,"2020-09-01 00:00:07.7440","2020-09-01 00:24:41.1800",3946,"St Nicholas Ave & W 137 St",40.818477,-73.947568,4002,"W 144 St & Adam Clayton Powell Blvd",40.820877,-73.939249,35860,"Customer",1990,2

*Projections* let us account for this, by defining a mapping between structured
document locations (as `JSON Pointers`_) and corresponding names ("fields")
in a flattened, table-based representation such as a CSV file or SQL table.

.. _`JSON Pointers`: https://docs.opis.io/json-schema/1.x/pointers.html

.. literalinclude:: rides.flow.yaml
   :language: yaml

Having done this, Flow's ingestion API will automatically identify the projection
of each CSV column from its header, and apply them to map each CSV row into a
document:

.. code-block:: console

   # Start a local instance of Flow.
   $ flowctl develop

   # Pipe CSV rows into Flow's CSV WebSocket ingestion API:
   $ unzip -p 202009-citibike-tripdata.csv.zip \
      | pv --line-mode --quiet --rate-limit 500 \
      | websocat --protocol csv/v1 ws://localhost:8081/ingest/examples/citi-bike/rides
   {"Offsets":{"examples/citi-bike/rides/pivot=00":1416},"Processed":3}
   {"Offsets":{"examples/citi-bike/rides/pivot=00":473577},"Processed":1033}
   {"Offsets":{"examples/citi-bike/rides/pivot=00":775687},"Processed":1692}

.. note::

   Flow offers a variety of ingestion APIs: gRPC, WebSockets,
   and POSTs of JSON over HTTP. More are planned, such as Database, Kenesis,
   and Kafka integrations.

Last-Seen Station of a Bike
---------------------------

We'll declare and test a collection that derives, for each bike, the station it last arrived at:

.. literalinclude:: last-seen.flow.yaml
   :language: yaml

We can materialize the collection into a database table:

.. code-block:: console

   $ flowctl materialize --collection examples/citi-bike/last-seen --table-name last_seen --target testDB

If you're in VSCode, you can query the attached database using the "SQLTools"
icon on the left bar. Or, use ``psql``:

.. code-block:: SQL

   select bike_id, "last/station/name", "last/timestamp" from last_seen limit 10;

Materialization tables always use the collection's key, and are update continuously to reflect ongoing changes of the collection.

Bike Relocations
----------------

Citi Bike will sometimes redistribute bikes between stations, when a station gets
too full or empty. These relocations show up as "holes" in the ride data,
where a bike mysteriously ends a ride at one station and starts its next ride at
a different station.

We can use Registers to enrich rides with explicit, interleaved "relocation" events:

.. literalinclude:: rides-and-relocations.flow.yaml
   :language: yaml

We can use ``gazctl`` to observe relocation events, as they're derived:

.. code-block:: console

   $ gazctl journals read --block -l estuary.dev/collection=examples/citi-bike/rides-and-relocations \
      | jq -c '. | select(.relocation)'

Station Status
--------------

Suppose we're building a station status API. We're bringing together some basic statistics
about each station, like the number of bikes which have arrived, departed, and been relocated
in or out. We also need to know which bikes are currently at each station.

To accomplish this, we'll build a collection keyed on station IDs into which we'll derive
documents that update our station status. However, we need to tell Flow how to *reduce*
these updates into a full view of a station's status, by adding ``reduce`` annotations
into our schema. Here's the complete schema for our station status collection:

.. literalinclude:: station.schema.yaml
   :language: yaml

Flow uses reduce annotations to build general "combiners" (in the map/reduce sense) over
documents of a given schema. Those combiners are employed automatically by Flow.

Now we define our derivation. Since Flow is handling reductions for us, our remaining
responsibility is to implement the "mapper" function which will transform source
events into status status updates:

.. literalinclude:: stations.flow.yaml
   :language: yaml

Now we can materialize the collection into a PostgreSQL table, and have a live view into stations:

.. code-block:: console

   $ flowctl materialize --collection examples/citi-bike/stations --table-name stations --target testDB

.. code-block:: SQL

   -- Current bikes at each station.
   select id, name, stable from stations order by name asc limit 10;
   -- Station arrivals and departures.
   select id, name, "arrival/ride", "departure/ride", "arrival/move", "departure/move"
      from stations order by name asc limit 10;

Idle Bikes
----------

We're next tasked with identifying when bikes have sat idle at a station for an extended
period of time. This is a potential signal that something is wrong with the bike,
and customers are avoiding it.

Event-driven systems usually aren't terribly good at detecting when things *haven't*
happened. At this point, an engineer will often reach for a task scheduler like Airflow,
and set up a job that takes periodic snapshots of bike locations, and compares them to
find ones which haven't changed.

Flow offers a simpler approach, which is to join the rides collection with itself,
using a *read delay*:

.. literalinclude:: idle-bikes.flow.yaml
   :language: yaml

After the read delay has elapsed, we'll start to see events in the "idle-bikes" collection:

.. code-block:: console

   $ gazctl journals read --block -l estuary.dev/collection=examples/citi-bike/idle-bikes

Commit message:

citi-bike: the flow files have too much commentary; simplify them
Some is moved into README, and some is just dropped as being too distracting.

examples/citi-bike/README.rst, after:

Citi Bike System Data
=====================

We'll be using Flow to capture and process Citi Bike `system data`_.
The dataset is available in the S3 "tripdata_" bucket as compressed CSV files
of each ride taken within the system, by month.

.. _system data: https://www.citibikenyc.com/system-data
.. _tripdata: https://s3.amazonaws.com/tripdata/index.html

Modeling Rides
--------------

Every Flow collection has an associated `JSON Schema`_ which describes its
documents. Let's begin with an example of a ride document that we want to schematize:

.. _`JSON Schema`: http://json-schema.org/understanding-json-schema/index.html

.. code-block:: json

   {
   "bike_id": 26396,
   "duration_seconds": 1193,
   "user_type": "Customer",
   "gender": 0,
   "birth_year": 1969,
   "begin": {
      "station": {
         "geo": {
         "latitude": 40.711863,
         "longitude": -73.944024
         },
         "id": 3081,
         "name": "Graham Ave & Grand St"
      },
      "timestamp": "2020-09-01 00:00:12.2020"
   },
   "end": {
      "station": {
         "geo": {
         "latitude": 40.68402,
         "longitude": -73.94977
         },
         "id": 3048,
         "name": "Putnam Ave & Nostrand Ave"
      },
      "timestamp": "2020-09-01 00:20:05.5470"
   }
   }

Here's a JSON Schema which models Citi Bike rides:

.. literalinclude:: ride.schema.yaml
   :language: yaml

There is a lot going on here. Let's unpack:

It defines the *shape* that documents can take.
   A *ride* document must have a ``{"bike_id": ..., "begin": ..., "end": ...}``.
   A *location* must have a ``{"latitude": ..., "longitude": ...}``, and so on.
   The ``$ref`` keyword makes it easy to define and re-use common structures;
   e.g., a "terminus" can represent either the beginning or end of the trip.

*Validations* constrain the types and values that documents can take.
   A "longitude" must be a number and fall within the expected range, and "gender"
   must be a value within the expected enumeration. Some properties are ``required``,
   while others are optional. Flow enforces that all documents of a collection
   must validate against its schema before they can be added.

   Flow is also able to *translate* many schema constraints (e.g. "/begin/station/id
   must exist and be an integer") into other kinds of schema -- like TypeScript types
   and SQL constraints -- which promotes end-to-end type safety and a better
   development experience.

*Annotations* attach information to locations within the document.
   Here, "title" and "description" give color to elements of the document.
   They're machine-accessible documentation -- which makes it possible to re-use
   these annotations in transformed versions of the schema.

   Annotations are a powerful feature of JSON Schema. Flow extends the JSON Schema
   specification with additional annotation keywords such as *reduction strategies*,
   which detail how multiple document instances can be combined together.

Capturing Rides
---------------

To work with ride events, first we need to define a collection into which we'll
ingest them. Simple enough, but a wrinkle is that the source dataset is
CSV files, using header names which don't match our schema:

.. code-block:: console

   $ wget https://s3.amazonaws.com/tripdata/202009-citibike-tripdata.csv.zip
   $ unzip -p 202009-citibike-tripdata.csv.zip  | head -5
   "tripduration","starttime","stoptime","start station id","start station name","start station latitude","start station longitude","end station id","end station name","end station latitude","end station longitude","bikeid","usertype","birth year","gender"
   4225,"2020-09-01 00:00:01.0430","2020-09-01 01:10:26.6350",3508,"St Nicholas Ave & Manhattan Ave",40.809725,-73.953149,116,"W 17 St & 8 Ave",40.74177603,-74.00149746,44317,"Customer",1979,1
   1868,"2020-09-01 00:00:04.8320","2020-09-01 00:31:13.7650",3621,"27 Ave & 9 St",40.7739825,-73.9309134,3094,"Graham Ave & Withers St",40.7169811,-73.94485918,37793,"Customer",1991,1
   1097,"2020-09-01 00:00:06.8990","2020-09-01 00:18:24.2260",3492,"E 118 St & Park Ave",40.8005385,-73.9419949,3959,"Edgecombe Ave & W 145 St",40.823498,-73.94386,41438,"Subscriber",1984,1
   1473,"2020-09-01 00:00:07.7440","2020-09-01 00:24:41.1800",3946,"St Nicholas Ave & W 137 St",40.818477,-73.947568,4002,"W 144 St & Adam Clayton Powell Blvd",40.820877,-73.939249,35860,"Customer",1990,2

*Projections* let us account for this, by defining a mapping between structured
document locations (as `JSON Pointers`_) and corresponding names ("fields")
in a flattened, table-based representation such as a CSV file or SQL table.

.. _`JSON Pointers`: https://docs.opis.io/json-schema/1.x/pointers.html

.. literalinclude:: rides.flow.yaml
   :language: yaml

Having done this, Flow's ingestion API will automatically identify the projection
of each CSV column from its header, and apply them to map each CSV row into a
document:

.. code-block:: console

   # Start a local instance of Flow.
   $ flowctl develop

   # Pipe CSV rows into Flow's CSV WebSocket ingestion API:
   $ unzip -p 202009-citibike-tripdata.csv.zip \
      | pv --line-mode --quiet --rate-limit 500 \
      | websocat --protocol csv/v1 ws://localhost:8081/ingest/examples/citi-bike/rides
   {"Offsets":{"examples/citi-bike/rides/pivot=00":1416},"Processed":3}
   {"Offsets":{"examples/citi-bike/rides/pivot=00":473577},"Processed":1033}
   {"Offsets":{"examples/citi-bike/rides/pivot=00":775687},"Processed":1692}

.. note::

   Flow offers a variety of ingestion APIs: gRPC, WebSockets,
   and POSTs of JSON over HTTP. More are planned, such as Database, Kenesis,
   and Kafka integrations.

Last-Seen Station of a Bike
---------------------------

We'll declare and test a collection that derives, for each bike, the station it last arrived at:

.. literalinclude:: last-seen.flow.yaml
   :language: yaml

We can materialize the collection into a database table:

.. code-block:: console

   $ flowctl materialize --collection examples/citi-bike/last-seen --table-name last_seen --target testDB

If you're in VSCode, you can query the attached database using the "SQLTools"
icon on the left bar. Or, use ``psql``:

.. code-block:: SQL

   select bike_id, "last/station/name", "last/timestamp" from last_seen limit 10;

Materialization tables always use the collection's key, and are update continuously to reflect ongoing changes of the collection.

Bike Relocations
----------------

Citi Bike will sometimes redistribute bikes between stations, when a station gets
too full or empty. These relocations show up as "holes" in the ride data,
where a bike mysteriously ends a ride at one station and starts its next ride at
a different station.

Suppose we want a collection which is enriched with explicit "relocation" events.
To derive it, we must determine if the start of a current ride is different than
the end of a previous ride, for each bike. But, we don't have the prior ending
station station available in the source document.

We can use *registers* to preserve a previous ending station, and compare it
with a current starting station for each bike:

.. literalinclude:: rides-and-relocations.flow.yaml
   :language: yaml

Use ``gazctl`` to observe relocation events, as they're derived:

.. code-block:: console

   $ gazctl journals read --block -l estuary.dev/collection=examples/citi-bike/rides-and-relocations \
      | jq -c '. | select(.relocation)'

Station Status
--------------

Suppose we're building a station status API. We're bringing together some basic statistics
about each station, like the number of bikes which have arrived, departed, and been relocated
in or out. We also need to know which bikes are currently at each station.

To accomplish this, we'll build a collection keyed on station IDs into which we'll derive
documents that update our station status. However, we need to tell Flow how to *reduce*
these updates into a full view of a station's status, by adding ``reduce`` annotations
into our schema. Here's the complete schema for our station status collection:

.. literalinclude:: station.schema.yaml
   :language: yaml

Flow uses reduce annotations to build general "combiners" (in the map/reduce sense) over
documents of a given schema. Those combiners are employed automatically by Flow.

Now we define our derivation. Since Flow is handling reductions for us, our remaining
responsibility is to implement the "mapper" function which will transform source
events into status status updates:

.. literalinclude:: stations.flow.yaml
   :language: yaml

Now we can materialize the collection into a PostgreSQL table, and have a live view into stations:

.. code-block:: console

   $ flowctl materialize --collection examples/citi-bike/stations --table-name stations --target testDB

.. code-block:: SQL

   -- Current bikes at each station.
   select id, name, stable from stations order by name asc limit 10;
   -- Station arrivals and departures.
   select id, name, "arrival/ride", "departure/ride", "arrival/move", "departure/move"
      from stations order by name asc limit 10;

Idle Bikes
----------

We're next tasked with identifying when bikes have sat idle at a station for an extended
period of time. This is a potential signal that something is wrong with the bike,
and customers are avoiding it.

Event-driven systems usually aren't terribly good at detecting when things *haven't*
happened. At this point, an engineer will often reach for a task scheduler like Airflow,
and set up a job that takes periodic snapshots of bike locations, and compares them to
find ones which haven't changed.

Flow offers a simpler approach, which is to join the rides collection with itself,
using a *read delay*:

.. literalinclude:: idle-bikes.flow.yaml
   :language: yaml

After the read delay has elapsed, we'll start to see events in the "idle-bikes" collection:

.. code-block:: console

   $ gazctl journals read --block -l estuary.dev/collection=examples/citi-bike/idle-bikes
